---
layout: post
title: Writing Effectively
permalink: /writingEffectively/
mathjax: true
except_separator: <!--more-->
categories: references
---

A collection of writing tips. If you're serious about writing, I'd recommend reading *On Writing Well* by William Zinsser. 

<!--more-->

<p class=message>
TLDR: Be concise & tell your story.
</p>

### 1. Dumb it Down

Especially in scientific writing, using simple language is a must. Your words might make sense to you, but they likely don't to most other people, and that's not their fault. 


### 2. Use the Active Voice

I know this is the first rule you learn in school, but at some point we all forget or are told otherwise. For instance, have you ever heard that you're not supposed to use pronouns in scientific writing? Something about keeping the focus on the data and not on the user. In my opinion, this is a pretty stupid rule, since the active voice keeps your writing energetic and engaging. If you have a cool scientific thing to discuss, don't make it boring with passive voice.

> *The satellite's flight software had been developed at NASA. The requirements were met by their software.*

See how there's no clear narrative with passive voice? We're missing a clear actor and action. Instead, we can do something like this:

> *NASA developed the satellite's flight software, and it met their requirements.*


### 3. Cut the Clutter

Be careful to avoid "fluffy" language in your writing. For instance, don't use big words where a smaller word would suffice. Also avoid those extra clauses, adverbs, or adjectives that don't contribute to your primary point. 

> *These improved performance metrics presents a compelling argument for the adoption of our recently developed program to classify and label images regarding animals of the species C. familiaris.*

This is a rather extreme example of "fluff". There are many big and unnecessary words here, which don't add any useful information. In general, use the shortest word you can, and take the shortest path to your point. 

> *Our classifier for dog images performed very well and should be used.*

Adverbs are especially susceptible to redundancy.

* *Clenched tightly*
* *Finished completely*
* *Whispered quietly*

### 4. Use Verbs not Nouns

In the same spirit as tip #2 to use the active voice, you should avoid turning your verbs into nouns. This is usually done by adding "tion" or "ment" to the end of a verb. For instance, *create* -> *creation*, *establish* -> *establishment*.

> *The establishment of a new cyber security team at the organization was a direct response to the recent breach.* 

This reads fine, but it's not very exciting. It lacks a strong actor and action.

> *The organization established a new cyber security team after the recent breach.* 


### 5. Only One Hedge Word

Hedge words are words which create ambiguity. These tend to dull the impact of a sentence. When using a hedge word, consider if you are actually uncertain, or if you're just trying to avoid committment. If something is truly uncertain, one hedge word is enough. 

> *The data perhaps suggests a potential connection between the two effects.* 

See how there are so many hedge words that hardly anything is being staked? The sentence also reads a lack of confidence. Let's either get rid of all the hedge words, or keep a maximum of one to express genuine uncertainty. 

> *The data (shows/suggests) a connection between the two effects*


### 6. Take Ownership

Don't be afraid to use "I" in your writing, and do take owernship of your opinions and thoughts. For the same reason you might dislike talking to an automated answering machine, I find that people are uninterested in writing that doesn't demonstrate personality. Especially when writing about science/technology which can be very dense. 

Also, the use of "I" can help bring out your writing style. As William Zinsser stays, "writing is an act of ego, and you might as well admit it". 


### 7. Write for Yourself

On the topic of style, one way to develop yours is to write for yourself. Don't feel overly burdened by what your readers might think. Use words/humor/pacing that feel right to you. To write is to be heard, so let the authentic version of yourself show through. However, this doesn't mean you should ignore the rules of effective communication. Being able to communicate an idea clearly and expressing that idea with personality aren't mutually exclusive.   










